# My farm experience

I've always been fascinated by ants. The way they organize to achieve some collective goal. Their voting process leading to emergence of paths or of how the nests are built, or any other kind of collective decision-making. Even though our models assumed local interactions and randomness as the principles of their organization, the effect of collective direction and the rapid adaptation to changes always excited me. How much order from so little!

I've played with various ant colony optimization algorithms to bring at least some ability to adapt to changes and making the code flow more robust. But the results were far from what I could observe in any real ant colony. Mostly because the ant colony has been adopted from the view of path optimizations which solves part of the problem, but doesn't touch how the colony functions fully. Over time, I dove more and more into biology, and the works of E.O.Wilson, especially books like Superoganism and Social Conquest of Earth. But the idea of collective emergence of multiple insects as one organism was a domain on its own. It lacked any kind of mapping to algorithmic problems.

A few years ago in 2021 I was given an opportunity to experience something new, replacing days in the office with what I now call my "green office". We bought an old farm, and ever since I've been observing real systems and playing with digital ones, trying to mimic the observations. The analogue-digital dualism blending into one, daily flow.

When we became "custodians of the land", parts of the farm were widely overgrown, with plants as high as two meters, growing densely. When I started to "clean" the area, I quickly discovered that I've stepped into a wonderful world of insects and spiders. Large ground spiders were all over the place, palm-sized mantises, and the white flowers on these large plants were attracting big metallic-green beetles, who could barely fly. I felt bad for destroying their habitat, but it was just too close to the house. So I decided I'll leave one-third of the area away from the house for these beings. Simply thinking that most of the creatures will move there, and I could observe what it means for them to deal with resource scarcity. In a few days, to my surprise, almost every large creature was gone.

I would consider it a coincidence, but something similar happened on another patch, a wild-flower pasture with plants higher than my waist. Full of large grasshoppers, mantises, all kinds of beetles, ant nests every few meters apart. I did the same as with the first patch, leaving around one-third of the habitat intact. The change wasn't as immediate as in the first case, but slowly, the large plants would start to die at the edge, the larger insects disappearing. And the patch of flowers decayed inward from its new boundaries.

It was as if I had crossed some threshold, some boundary that caused the collapse of necessary conditions required for such micro-ecosystems to exist.

I've noticed this over many various interactions/experiments with different patches on the farm. Emergence of some organisms after wide-area conditions were met, and collapsing, when going too far.

But it wasn't just the insects. Retaining healthy families of birds over the years depended on the abundance of insects but also on various fruits. Over-farm, overgraze, break the conditions, and the population density shifts rapidly.

However, the most surprising observation of this "breaking of coherence" was in the case of sheep. We are lucky enough to share the pastures with a flock of sheep, around 30 to 40 in size. Sheep love fruits. We have orchard as well as some wild trees growing in the pasture area. At first, it was amusing to observe them, how they ran under the tree to pick up any fallen fruit. But over time, a pattern emerged. They had preference, some fruits or types even over the others. And I've noticed there is an ordered path in which they visit the trees. Not only that, they remembered all the spots where they broke through the fence to get access to other parts of the orchard as well. And the order in which they checked the fence was pretty much reinforced by the escape's success rate. They could even plan a few steps in advance to know how to break their way through various sections of the pastures to their favorite tree (outside the pastures, of course). Proper and quite impressive planning.

Sheep also have a leader, and they follow her. She makes the final decision. As well as few other members that initiate activity, or have capabilities that the rest mimic. But at some point over time, the flock changed as well as introduced so many new members that it was as if the knowledge somehow lost its coherence. Although there were still the "active ones" present, they didn't behave the same in this new group. And it took quite some time for the heard to "restore" or "remember" the old paths, although their behavior was never the same again. With new members, new patterns emerged.

And each major change, say one-third of the flock, introduced new behavior patterns. Subtle changes in the order of movement, preference of location, and especially techniques to break the fence. The latest iteration of the flock's technique is to crawl under the fence.

Some techniques get lost as well. There was a sheep that mastered standing up on her hind legs and reaching the higher branches which still had fruit on. Using other sheep for support sometimes. And some others imitated her. But when she was gone, the flock never used the same technique again. Although a variation survived, as another sheep morphed it into a different form, using the fence as sort of stairs to climb over it, use it for support and reach higher branches. But the flock didn't restore it as a general behavior.

Plants are no less exciting, though. Remove one from a larger area and something new takes its place. And you have basically no "control" over what will be the replacement. The more intrusions you make to altering specific plants, the more the whole becomes unstable. However, it is possible to figure out points of stability, where you can regrow same kind of wildflower pastures over and over again, with the same density of insects after each intervention. It's as if there are discrete states, conditions you have to keep if you want to grow small plants with small insects, or larger ones, etc.

All in all, it became more and more obvious that there's more than just local interaction, that there seem to be global, wide-area properties that need to be satisfied, as if there needs to be a graph large and dense enough before some new next-level property emerges. Which shaped how I started thinking about live systems, going beyond local agent-to-agent interaction, thinking about larger structures as "one whole", a next-level building block with its own properties and components.

And the funniest part is, that I can only now look at the observations and experiments from a coherent view. At the time, they were all just bits and pieces. All having shared properties, but not a unified language. And now they do.

I wasn’t just managing and observing a farm. I was interacting while organisms experienced and restructured themselves.

© 2025 Uros Jovanovic. CC BY-SA 4.0.
